Listhelper is a Mailman helper to help mailing list moderators.

A Short Summary of How Listhelper Works

Listhelper is a mailing list robot that reads moderator messages from
GNU Mailman.  A list is configured to allow through subscriber and
whitelisted addresses.  Therefore only non-subscriber email is held
for moderation.  Mailman sends a moderator message to listhelper and
listhelper sends the message through SpamAssassin.  It is primarily
based upon SpamAssassin but also include other checks.  If the message
is categorized as spam then listhelper replies to the moderator
message with the discard control portion.  GNU Mailman upon receiving
that control message will discard the spam from the hold queue.

Most spam comes from non-subscribers.  This means that most of the
spam is processed through listhelper and automatically discarded.  The
rules are tuned conservatively since a false positive is much worse
than a false negative.  Mail is not approved by this system.  Mail
categorized as spam is discarded but valid mail must still be
approved.  A human must still run the Mailman hold queue periodically
to approve messages and to discard false negatives.  Forged mail
defeats the system since Mailman can only whitelist addresses and
accepts forgeries as real.  (This is going to be a big problem in the
future but so far has only been an infrequent annoyance.)

I set this up to combat the huge amount of spam that was flowing into
the gnu.org mailing lists.  They were becoming unusable and so I
hacked this together to deal with the problem.  Now a couple of years
later most of the gnu.org mailing lists are being processed through
listhelper to keep the spam flow blocked off.  It is pretty effective.
But it is not without its own share of problems.

The best place to put anti-spam controls is at the earliest point
where spam can enter the system.  Unfortunately I couldn't affect
changes to the upstream mail filtering.  I could only address the
problem by attacking it from the outside.  The only interface
available was Mailman's remote mail control interface.  Since all I
had was lemons I made lemonade.

One problem is that when network outages occur there is a backlog of
spam in the pipeline that needs to be processed.  This pipeline delay
can take hours or even days to catch up due to the huge volume of spam
mail.  If gnu.org is down for 10 hours it can take my remote system as
long as 20 hours to catch up with the backlog.  In that time all of
the spam is seen in the mailman web interface to the hold queue.

Another problem is that this is centralizing spam categorization which
can quickly overwhelm the system.  My server can't keep up with the
world's spam flow.  I am still doing okay with the 1372 mailing lists
so far but I can tell that the straws are adding up on that camel's
back.  Eventually this is going to have to push upstream back onto
Mailman to filter better at the incoming end of the pipeline.

The listhelper is written in portable languages but is not really
designed as a portable application.  It was written in place for
exactly the task that it is presently performing.  Trying to replicate
this in another location for another mailing list should be possible
but will not be for the faint of heart.

================================================================

Copyright 2008 Bob Proulx <bob@proulx.com>

This program is free software: you can redistribute it and/or modify
it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as published by
the Free Software Foundation, either version 3 of the License, or
(at your option) any later version.

This program is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the
GNU General Public License for more details.

You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public License
along with this program.  If not, see <http://www.gnu.org/licenses/>.
